Title: Wild : An Act of Rescue
Category: outdoors/fishing
Author: kschirms
Tags: writing,environmentalism,wild
Status: published

An essay by [kschirms](/author/kschirms.html) on fly fishing the wild and roaming waters of Idaho. 

><strong>Wild: An Act of Rescue</strong><br><br>I recently caught my first wild trout in the Boise River. When I saw the glimmer dartout toward the surface and set my hook, I thought I‘d just caught my biggest fish yet! Based on how hard my line was being tugged to-and-fro my expectations were high. After giving out line and coaxing the fish gently into my net, my first reaction was one of disappointment. The fish straining for freedom was tiny compared to others I’d caught on that same stretch of river. My disappointment soon melted in fascination and marvel upon closer examination of my scaled friend. The vibrancy of colors gave true honor to the name ‘rainbow trout.’ Fierce eyes showed pure fight and grit and wild. His tiny frame fought with more power and gusto than any of his farmed, dimly-colored brethren I’d caught with semi-frequency in those waters. This tiny creature’s life had been spent in Idaho waterways, with space to swim, resources to battle for. And plenty of clean sunshine and air.<br><br>I unhooked his lip thanked him for the experience of encountering his presence, let him rest in my water-filled net and then released him back into his first and only home. I stood there for quite some time. Looking at the river, as it swirled and pooled around me. I knew I’d just experienced a moment of significance, one of those quiet, simple moments that changes the entire trajectory of your life. My eyes were filled with tears, and I realized that this was the first “true” fish I had ever caught in my brief six months as a beginner fly-fisherwoman. This moment was why people spend years slogging through mud, hopping boulders, bearing icy waters – to experience a reverent moment of connecting with something wild. Perhaps to reconnect with that bit of wild within themselves that may need reawakening.<br><br>We have fully entered the Anthropocene. The majority of people in the world live in cites, urban environments that offer jobs and amenities and entertainment, as well as hectic busyness, loneliness, and growing inequality. I have been fortunate to have travelled extensively in my 24 years of life thus far, and while I do love the city experience once in a while, I feel most alive in the backcountry, off the grid. Waking up to discover wolf tracks in camp as I sip my morning tea. Seeing the sun dip below the ridge, casting the forest into deepening shadows, causing owls to call out their hunting intentions. Catching a wild rainbow trout on a glorious mid-September afternoon filled with sunshine turned solid gold in leaf form.<br><br>When we forget our wild side, we become like those farmed fish: our colors dull, we tire easily, we fight constantly, but we’re not sure what we’re fighting for. The fins on farmed trout are torn from biting each other in the cramped spaces where they are bred. How often do we humans turn to blame shifting and anger out of fear that we are somehow losing out on something? How often does a fear of scarcity lead to lashing out at neighbors?<br><br>The wild trout trying to free himself from my hook had more reason to fight because he knew the grandness of life. The wild born-and-bred trout have a sense of space, the bigger picture. This might just be me aggrandizing a simple aquatic life form. A fish, after all, from an evolutionary standpoint is almost shockingly simple in its biology. But the role that fish play, ecologically speaking, is of utmost importance.<br><br>In Idaho, on the great granite slabs bursting from the ground in intimidating jagged blades, rugged trees grow out of nutrient-deficient soil. Take a tree core sample from any Ponderosa Pine in the Sawtooth Mountain Range, and you’ll see distinct carbon markers from the Pacific Ocean. An unknown number of generations of Chinook Salmon make the daring 500+ mile journey every year to spawn and then die in Redfish Lake. (The namesake is self-evident.) Whole ecosystems are entirely dependent on this one species of fish making this semi-miraculous journey. Year after year. <br><br>But humans are messing it up. Dams, overfishing, and the introduction of invasive species create a literal gauntlet through which the Chinook mustfight their way. By one expert’s opinion, the salmon will only survive 20 more years before facing extinction. We’re not even close to begin understanding the depth of loss this extinction event would bring. Will there be any trees in the Sawtooths 100 years from now? In our culture of hyper-busyness and constant consumption, appreciating true wildness is a rare and under-practiced habit. I think perhaps this is in part due to the connotation of unruliness, uncontrollability, and the unknown that people automatically associate with wildness. But what are we losing when we choose convenience over depth? Convention over trailblazing? Farmed over wild-born? My soul continues to be moved by that sunshine-filled September day. It now knows what it’s fighting for when it feels the tug of a hook.
